Add CVA6 requirement specification (#848)
openhwgroup/cva6: docs/specifications/cva6_requirement_specification.adoc

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, any work distributed under the License is distributed on an “AS IS” BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

== Introduction

CVA6 is a RISC-V compatible application processor core that can be configured as a 32- or 64-bit core (RV32 or RV64). It includes L1 caches, optional MMU, optional PMP and optional FPU.

It is an industrial evolution of ARIANE created by ETH Zürich and the University of Bologna. It is written in SystemVerilog and maintained by the OpenHW Group.

This specification is organized as requirements that apply to the “Scope of the IP”.

The requirement list is to be approved by the OpenHW Group Technical Work Group (TWG), as well as its change requests.

The specification will be complemented by a user’s guide.

> Revision 0 refers to the product of the first CVA6 project led at OpenHW Group. It is a placeholder in case of future evolutions after project freeze (PF gate).

Reviewer: Why Revision 0, should't we use Release 1.0.0?

Author: With 0, this is obvious that there is no previous OpenHW revision of the core. Except if we have another published guideline.

Reviewer: Release 1.0.0 is the existing release pattern for the first core (CV32E40P R1.0.0) and we should stick to that

Author: Changed to 1.0.0

> Revision 0 refers to the product of the first CVA6 project led at OpenHW Group. It is a placeholder in case of future evolutions after project freeze (PF gate).

Reviewer: Why Revision 0, should't we use Release 1.0.0?

Author: Duplicate remark.

> A list of abbreviations is available at the end of this document.

Reviewer 2: This is simply a test of adding a comment to this review.  Please ignore.

Author: Thanks for this comment which is easy to resolve.

== Scope

=== Scope of the IP

The *scope of the IP* is the subsystem that is specified below and that will undergo verification with a 100% coverage goal. In the verification plans, the scope of the IP can be broken down in several DUT (design under test).

The scope of the IP is the *CVA6 hardware* supporting all the features used in products based on CVA6.

CVA6 exists in two main configurations: *CV64A6* and *CV32A6*. A requirement referring to CVA6 applies to both configurations.

image::images/cva6_scope.png[]

As displayed in the picture above, the IP comprises:

* The CVA6 core;
* L1 write-through cache;
* Optional FPU;
* Optional MMU;
* Optional PMP;
* CSR;
* Performance counters;

> * Interface with the P-Mesh coherence system of OpenPiton.

Reviewer: Or, presumably with AXI bus (so that should be listed too)

Author: Duplicate remark.

> * Interface with the P-Mesh coherence system of OpenPiton.

Reviewer: Or, presumably with AXI bus (so that should be listed too)

Author: Added a line for AXI.

These are not part of the IP (several solutions can be used):

* CLINT or PLIC Interrupt modules;
* Debug module (such as DTM);
* Support of L1 write-back cache (this might come later as an update).

In addition to these main configurations, several fine grain parameters are available.

Unless otherwise stated, an optional feature is controlled by a SystemVerilog parameter. If not selected, the optional feature will not be present in the netlist after synthesis.

The reader’s attention is drawn to the difference between an optional feature (“...shall support as an option...”) and a desired goal (“...should support...”, “....should reduce latency...”).

These are not in the scope of this specification:

> * SW layers, such as compiler and OSes (that can however be part of the OpenHW Group CVA6 project);

Reviewer: It isn't clear to me what the SW projects are part of this project, which is already of very large scope. Wouldn't it be easier to manage well defined project(s) for the compilers and linux/OS support?

Author: This is a requirement specification for the core HW base (the object to verify) and it does not touch the project workplan. For more information about SW tasks, refer to the PA gate workplan: https://github.com/openhwgroup/core-v-docs/blob/master/program/Project-Descriptions-and-Plans/CVA6/CVA6-plan-approved-2022.md

Reviewer: ok, I was referring to "compiler and OSes (that can however be part of the OpenHW Group CVA6 project)." But you are correct, we can deal with that in the PA workplan.

> * SW layers, such as compiler and OSes (that can however be part of the OpenHW Group CVA6 project);

Reviewer: It isn't clear to me what the SW projects are part of this project, which is already of very large scope. Wouldn't it be easier to manage well defined project(s) for the compilers and linux/OS support?

Author: Duplicate remark.

* SW emulation of RISC-V optional extensions ( feasible but the scope of the IP is the core hardware);

> * Other features included in the testbench (main memory, firmware, interconnect…), the coverage of which will not be measured;

Reviewer: "the coverage of which will not be measured" - not very clear - measured by what?

Author: "coverage" -> "verification coverage"

> * Other features included in the testbench (main memory, firmware, interconnect…), the coverage of which will not be measured;

Reviewer: "the coverage of which will not be measured" - not very clear - measured by what?

Author: Duplicate remark.

* The vector coprocessor (CV-VEC) that is planned to interface with CV64A6.

=== Verified configurations

> It is not possible to verify all 2^n^ combinations of parameters. Below is the list of configurations that will undergo verification in the project and their main parameters. The full list of parameters for each configuration will be detailed in the users’ guide.

Reviewer: Probably not really 2^n as some of the parameters aren't binary. Anyway, it is possible.  I'd rather say "it is not feasible to verify all possible combinations of parameters".

Author: Modified "2^n" into "possible".

> It is not possible to verify all 2^n^ combinations of parameters. Below is the list of configurations that will undergo verification in the project and their main parameters. The full list of parameters for each configuration will be detailed in the users’ guide.

Reviewer: Probably not really 2^n as some of the parameters aren't binary. Anyway, it is possible.  I'd rather say "it is not feasible to verify all possible combinations of parameters".

Author: Duplicate remark.

[RVpriv]  “The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume II: Privileged Architecture, Document Version  20211203”,  Editors  Andrew  Waterman, Krste  Asanović and John Hauser,  RISC-V Foundation, December 4, 2021.

[RVdbg] “RISC-V External Debug Support, Document Version 0.13.2”, Editors Tim Newsome and Megan Wachs, RISC-V Foundation, March 22, 2019.

[RVcompat] “RISC-V Architectural Compatibility Test Framework”, https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-arch-test[https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-arch-test]. +

[AXI] AXI Specification, https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ihi0022/hc[https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ihi0022/hc]. +

[CV-X-IF] Placeholder for the CV-X-IF coprocessor interface currently prepared at OpenHW Group; current version in https://docs.openhwgroup.org/projects/openhw-group-core-v-xif/[https://docs.openhwgroup.org/projects/openhw-group-core-v-xif/]. +

[OpenPiton] “OpenPiton Microarchitecture Specification”, Princeton University, https://parallel.princeton.edu/openpiton/docs/micro_arch.pdf[https://parallel.princeton.edu/openpiton/docs/micro_arch.pdf]. +

> == Reference specifications

Reviewer: What is the difference between Applicable and Reference specifications? Maybe just Specifications?

Author: This is a distinction I have been used to make (a bit the same way I make a clear distinction between requirement and informative text).
Applicable = These documents partly or wholly apply to the requirements contained in this document.
Reference = This is for information and does not directly apply to requirements.
BTW, I have renamed "Reference specifications" into "Reference documents".

> == Reference specifications

Reviewer: What is the difference between Applicable and Reference specifications? Maybe just Specifications?

Author: Duplicate remark.

[RVcmo] “RISC-V Base Cache Management Operation ISA Extensions, version 1.0-fd39d01, 2022-01-12” +

[CLINT] Core-Local Interruptor (CLINT), “SiFive E31 Core Complex Manual v2p0”, chapter 6, https://static.dev.sifive.com/SiFive-E31-Manual-v2p0.pdf[https://static.dev.sifive.com/SiFive-E31-Manual-v2p0.pdf] + 

== Other documents

[FPGAreset] Ken Chapman, “Get Smart About Reset: Think Local, Not Global”, Xilinx WP272 white paper, https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/white_papers/wp272.pdf[https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/white_papers/wp272.pdf]. +

== Functional requirements

=== General requirement

|===

|GEN&#8209;10|CVA6 shall be *fully compliant with RISC-V specifications* [RVunpriv], [RVpriv] and [RVdbg] by implementing all mandatory features for the set of extensions that are selected and by passing [RVcompat] compatibility tests.

|===

> As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification is a place where to specify these options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification specifies these options.
```
```suggestion
As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification is a place where to specify these options.
```

Author: Duplicate remark.

> As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification is a place where to specify these options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification specifies these options.
```
```suggestion
As the RISC-V specification leaves space for options, this specification is a place where to specify these options.
```

Author: Changed to "this specification specificies some of these variations"

> 

Reviewer: It wasn't 100% clear if  "as an *option*" always means as a compile-time option or a run-time option. For example, does ISA-110 mean that invariability of duration of instructions is turned on at compile time or at run time?

Author: Changed "options" to "variations" in this sentence to avoid misunderstandings. Completed ISA-110.

=== RISC-V standard instructions

To ease tracing to verification, the extensions have been split in independent requirements.
|===

|ISA&#8209;10|CV64A6 shall support *RV64I* base instruction set, version 2.1.
|ISA&#8209;20|CV32A6 shall support *RV32I* base instruction set, version 2.1.
|ISA&#8209;30|CVA6 shall support the **M** extension (integer multiply and divide), version 2.0.
|ISA&#8209;40|CVA6 shall support the **A** extension (atomic instructions), version 2.1.
|ISA&#8209;50|CV32A6 shall support as an *option* the **F** extension (single-precision floating-point), version 2.2.

> |ISA&#8209;60|CV64A6 shall support as an *option* the **F** and **D** extensions (single- and double-precision floating-point), version 2.2.

Reviewer: Since F extension is specified by ISA-70 why is it also listed in ISA-60?

Author: CV64A6 cannot support the D extension with the F extension. I have added a note after the table so that it is clearer.

> |ISA&#8209;60|CV64A6 shall support as an *option* the **F** and **D** extensions (single- and double-precision floating-point), version 2.2.

Reviewer: Since F extension is specified by ISA-70 why is it also listed in ISA-60?

Author: Duplicate remark.

|ISA&#8209;70|CV64A6 shall support as an *option* the **F** extension (single-precision without double-precision floating-point), version 2.2.

> |ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0 as an *option*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support as an *option* the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0.
```
```suggestion
|ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0 as an *option*.
```

Author: Implemented.

> |ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0 as an *option*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support as an *option* the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0.
```
```suggestion
|ISA&#8209;80|CVA6 shall support the **C** extension (compressed instructions), version 2.0 as an *option*.
```

|ISA&#8209;90|CVA6 shall support the *Zicsr* extension (CSR instructions), version 2.0.
|ISA&#8209;100|CVA6 shall support the *Zifencei* extension, version 2.0.

> |ISA&#8209;110|As an *option*, the duration of instructions shall be independent from the operand values.

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to refer to CV32E40S which I think has a similar feature if I'm not wrong

> |ISA&#8209;110|As an *option*, the duration of instructions shall be independent from the operand values.

Reviewer: Would it be helpful to refer to CV32E40S which I think has a similar feature if I'm not wrong

Author: Duplicate remark.

|===

Note to ISA-110: In the current design, the duration of the division is data-dependent, which can be a security issue.

=== Privileges and virtual memory

The MMU includes a TLB and a hardware PTW.

|===

|PVL&#8209;10|CVA6 shall support *machine*, *supervisor***,** *user* and *debug* privilege modes.
|PVL&#8209;20|CV64A6 shall support as an *option* the *Sv39* virtual memory, version 1.11.
|PVL&#8209;30|CV32A6 shall support as an *option* the *Sv32* virtual memory version 1.11.

> |PVL&#8209;40|CVA6 instances that do not feature virtual memory shall support the *Bare* mode.

Reviewer: Not clear if this is a direct consequence of not supporting virtual memory or is Bare mode an optional feature that might or might not be turned on?

Author: Duplicate remark.

> |PVL&#8209;40|CVA6 instances that do not feature virtual memory shall support the *Bare* mode.

Reviewer: Not clear if this is a direct consequence of not supporting virtual memory or is Bare mode an optional feature that might or might not be turned on?

Author: This is indeed a direct consequence as the virtual memory is an option. I marked a requirement for it so that we do not forget to verify the Bare mode.

|HPM&#8209;70|CVA6 shall implement the `mcountinhibit` counter-inhibit register.
|HPM&#8209;80|CVA6 shall implement the read-only `cycle`, `instret`, `hpmcounter3` to `hpmcounter8` access to counters (and their upper 32-bit counterparts in CV32A6).
|===

The user’s manual will detail the list of counters, events and related controls.

=== Cache requirements  

Caches increase the performance of the processor with regard to memory accesses. Most of their added value for the IP is specified through performance requirements in another section. Here below are specific requirements for these caches.

The project would like to adopt the recently ratified [RVcmo] specification. The analysis yet needs to be performed and will likely lead to an evolution of this specification.

==== L1 write-through data cache

In the requirements below, L1WTD refers to the L1 write-through data cache that is part of the CVA6.

The first two requirements express the write-through feature. Some requirements are useful for security- and safety-critical applications where a high level of timing predictability is needed.

|===

> |L1W&#8209;10|L1WTD shall reflect all write accesses (stores) by the CVA6 core to the external memory after an upper-bounded number of cycles.

Reviewer: is that a configurable or fixed upper-bound? Also  I think you mean "within" an upper-bounded number of cycles, not "after".

Author: Duplicate remark.

> |L1W&#8209;10|L1WTD shall reflect all write accesses (stores) by the CVA6 core to the external memory after an upper-bounded number of cycles.

Reviewer: is that a configurable or fixed upper-bound? Also  I think you mean "within" an upper-bounded number of cycles, not "after".

Author: This is not configurable. It just means that L1WTD shall not wait forever to reflect the access write; otherwise it would be a write-back cache. Any better wording suggestion is appreciated.

Reviewer: L1WTD shall reflect all write accesses (stores) by the CVA6 core to the external memory within an upper-bounded number of cycles. The upper-bound is fixed but not specified here.

Author: Implemented.

|L1W&#8209;20|L1WTD shall not change the order of write accesses to the external memory with respect to the order of write accesses (stores) received from the CVA6 core.
|L1W&#8209;30|L1WTD should offer the following size/ways configurations: +
- 0 kbyte (no cache), +
- 4 kbytes (4 or 8 ways), +
- 8 kbytes (4, 8 or 16 ways), + 
- 16 kbytes (4, 8 or 16 ways), +
- 32 kbytes (8 or 16 ways).

> |L1W&#8209;40|L1WTD shall support datasize extension to store EDC, ECC or other information.

Reviewer: Is the the EDC or ECC feature specified?

Author: No, it's not. In the specification, we only tell to leave bit fields available for that. The actual implementation of EDC or ECC is not included in the OpenHW project.

Reviewer: ok, but suggest you specify the range of length of the datasize extension, presumably that is a compile time parameter?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I have implemented it.

> |L1W&#8209;40|L1WTD shall support datasize extension to store EDC, ECC or other information.

Reviewer: Is the the EDC or ECC feature specified?

Author: Duplicate remark.

|L1W&#8209;60|Some physical memory regions shall be configurable as not L1WTD cacheable at design time.
|L1W&#8209;70|It shall be possible to invalidate L1WTD content with the `FENCE.T` command.
|L1W&#8209;80|The replacement policy of L1WTD shall be LFSR (pseudo-random) or LRU (least recently used).
|L1W&#8209;90|L1WTD should offer a feature to transform cache ways into a scratchpad.
|L1W&#8209;100|A custom CSR shall allow to disable or enable L1WTD.
|===

Cache counters are defined in the performance counters.

32 kbytes & 4 ways is not feasible with the current architecture. Other size/ways configurations may be implemented in the design.

The design will support one replacement policy allowed by L1W-80.

==== L1 Instruction cache

In the requirements below, L1I refers to the L1 instruction cache that is part of the CVA6.

Some requirements are useful for security- and safety-critical applications where a high level of timing predictability is needed.

|===

|L1I&#8209;10|L1I should offer the following size/ways configurations: +
- 4 kbytes: 3, 4 or 8 ways, +
- 8 kbytes: 4, 8, or 16 ways, +
- 16 kbytes: 4, 8 or 16 ways, +
- 32 kbytes: 8 or 16 ways.

> |L1I&#8209;20|L1I shall support datasize extension to store EDC, ECC or other information.

Reviewer: Same question, are these features specified already?

Author: No, it's not. In the specification, we only tell to leave bit fields available for that. The actual implementation of EDC or ECC is not included in the OpenHW project.

Reviewer: same suggestion as above

Author: I have implemented the same way.

> |L1I&#8209;20|L1I shall support datasize extension to store EDC, ECC or other information.

Reviewer: Same question, are these features specified already?

Author: Duplicate remark.

|===

|PPA&#8209;10|CVA6 should be resource-optimized on FPGA and ASIC targets.
|PPA&#8209;20|CVA6 should deliver more than 2.1 CoreMark/MHz.
|PPA&#8209;30|CV32A6 should run at more than 150 MHz in the cv32a6_imac_sv32 configuration on Kintex 7 FPGA technology, commercial -2 speed grade.
|PPA&#8209;40|CV64A6 should run at more than 900 MHz in the cv64a6_imacfd_sv39 configuration on 28FDSOI technology in the worst case frequency corner with the fastest threshold voltage.
|PPA&#8209;50|TBD: Placeholder for single-precision floating performance per MHz.
|PPA&#8209;60|TBD: Placeholder for double-precision floating performance per MHz.
|===

== Interface requirements

=== Memory bus

|===

|MEM&#8209;10|CVA6 memory interface shall comply with AXI5 specification including the Atomic_Transactions property support as defined in [AXI] section E1.1.
|MEM&#8209;20|CVA6 AXI memory interface shall feature user bit extensions on the data bus (`WUSER` and `RUSER` as per [AXI]) in connection with the L1I and L1WTD datasize extensions, with a number of user bits greater or equal to 0.
|===

> The interface usually complies with AXI4. However, Atomic_Transactions is only defined in AXI5. For the sake of clarity, we do not use the AXI5-Lite interface.

Reviewer: what does "usually complies with AXI4" mean? is that just an informative comment that AXI5 is similar to AXI4 with the addition of Atomic_Transactions?

Author: Duplicate remark.

> The interface usually complies with AXI4. However, Atomic_Transactions is only defined in AXI5. For the sake of clarity, we do not use the AXI5-Lite interface.

Reviewer: what does "usually complies with AXI4" mean? is that just an informative comment that AXI5 is similar to AXI4 with the addition of Atomic_Transactions?

Author: Removed "usually"

|===

The goal is to have a compatible interface between CORE-V cores (CVA6, CV32E40X…). The feasibility still needs to be confirmed; including the speculative execution.

CVA6 can interface with several coprocessors simultaneously through a specific external feature implemented on the CV-X-IF interface.

=== Multi-core interface

|===

|TRI&#8209;10|CVA6 shall have the Transaction-Response Interface (TRI) needed to interface with the P-Mesh coherence system of OpenPiton, according to [OpenPiton].

|===

=== Design rules

As different teams have different design rules and to ease the integration in FPGA and ASIC design flows:

|===

|RUL&#8209;10|CVA6 should have a configurable reset signal: synchronous/asynchronous, active on high or low levels.
|RUL&#8209;20|For certain FPGA targets, CVA6 should as an *option* remove the reset in the RTL code.
|RUL&#8209;30|CVA6 shall be a super-synchronous design with a single clock input.
|RUL&#8209;40|CVA6 should not include multi-cycle paths.
|RUL&#8209;50|CVA6 should not include technology-dependent blocks.
|===
[FPGAreset] provides background information about the RUL-20 requirement.

> If technology-dependent blocks are used, e.g. to improve PPA on certain targets, the equivalent technology-independent block should be available. Parameters can be used to select between the implementations.

Reviewer: Wasn't clear what "technology-independent block should be available" is requiring.

Author: This is a guidance that has to be analysed according to the context. As you can see, it is not included in a requirement. I did not see a better way of saying it.

Reviewer: Does it mean that the equivalent technology-independent blocks should be developed by the project, but may be swapped out?

Author: Both should be available in the project. There will be a way at compile-time to select the used block version.
(Like in VHDL where you can have an entity=a module which has several architectures).

> If technology-dependent blocks are used, e.g. to improve PPA on certain targets, the equivalent technology-independent block should be available. Parameters can be used to select between the implementations.

Reviewer: Wasn't clear what "technology-independent block should be available" is requiring.

Author: Duplicate remark.
